.TH SHDOC 1 "June 2026" "shdoc v1.4" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
shdoc \- generate Markdown API documentation from shell source comments
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shdoc
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.br
.B shdoc
.RB [ \-\-version ]
.br
.B shdoc
.RI [ FILE ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shdoc
reads a shell script, parses annotation comments, and writes GitHub-flavored
Markdown documentation to standard output.
If
.I FILE
is omitted, input is read from standard input.
.PP
Annotations are comments beginning with
.BR "# @" .
File annotations describe the generated document. Function annotations are
collected until the next shell function declaration, where the pending block is
rendered. Section annotations group following functions. Function-like text
inside
.B @example
blocks is ignored.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show command-line help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show version information and exit.
.SH ANNOTATIONS
.TP
.B @name
Set the project name used as the document title.
.TP
.B @file
Alias for
.BR @name .
.TP
.B @brief
Set a short project summary.
.TP
.B @description
Set a multiline description for the file, current section, or next function.
Continuation lines are written as comment lines after the tag.
.TP
.B @deprecated
Mark the next documented function as deprecated.
.TP
.B @section
Start a named section for following functions.
.TP
.B @example
Add a multiline usage example for the next function. The captured block is
unindented and rendered as a Bash code fence.
.TP
.B @option
Describe a command-line option accepted by the function. Options may be short,
long, or alternatives separated by a vertical bar.
.TP
.B @arg
Describe a positional argument such as
.BR $1
or
.BR $@ .
.TP
.B @noargs
State that the function does not accept arguments.
.TP
.B @set
Describe a global variable set by the function.
.TP
.B @exitcode
Describe an exit status returned by the function.
.TP
.BR @stdin ", " @stdout ", " @stderr
Describe expected standard input, standard output, or standard error.
Indented comment lines continue the previous entry.
.TP
.B @see
Add a related function, anchor, or Markdown link to the function's "See also"
section.
.TP
.B @internal
Skip documentation for the next annotated function.
.SH EXAMPLES
Generate documentation from standard input:
.PP
.nf
shdoc < lib.sh > REFERENCE.md
.fi
.PP
Generate documentation from a named file:
.PP
.nf
shdoc lib.sh > REFERENCE.md
.fi
.PP
Example annotated function:
.PP
.nf
# @description Say hello to a name.
# @arg $1 string Name to greet.
# @stdout A greeting line.
say-hello() {
    echo "Hello $1"
}
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B shdoc
exits 0 after successful generation or after printing help or version
information. It exits non-zero when GNU Awk reports an error or when parsing
fails.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I contrib/shdoc.1
Manual page distributed with the source tree.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gawk (1)
.PP
Project homepage: https://github.com/reconquest/shdoc
